We're back in the Landing Pages Streamlined - Mobile Only custom report,
and you may notice a yellow shield appearing at the top of the report.
If we hover over the yellow shield,
we see the message that this report is based on 43.79 percent of sessions.
This means that sampling has kicked in.
There are two factors that together cause sampling in Google Analytics.
One is that the time period you've selected has to include more than 500,000 sessions.
In the paid version of GA,
the threshold for sampling is much higher,
100 million sessions, and you can export unsampled data if sampling does occur in the UI.
But in the free version of GA,
sampling can kick in with 500,000 sessions or more.
The other factor that causes sampling is when you use a feature
that requires Google Analytics to do on-the-fly calculation.
This could be secondary dimensions,
or segments, or some custom reports.
If we navigate for instance to
the Mobile Overview report and we add our Australia and New Zealand segment,
we can see that the same sampling rate has kicked in 43.79 percent.
If we go to Mobile Devices,
we still see the same level of sampling.
How does sampling work in this report?
For right now, let's remove the all user segment.
Let's consider the Google Pixel 2 XL,
and have sampling might affect how it's reported.
If we apply the Australia and New Zealand segment to our Mobile Devices report,
this report may not show an accurate number of
pixel 2 XL sessions from Australia and New Zealand.
Let's say that in reality,
there were 10,000 of these sessions in the time period selected.
The challenge is that Google Analytics hasn't already calculated
metrics for every combination of mobile device and country.
By applying a segment to the report,
you're forcing on-the-fly calculation.
So again, when that 500,000 session threshold is exceeded,
and you add a segment to a report,
GA applies that segment only to a portion of the underlying view data,
and then it multiplies the resulting metrics back out to the 100 percent proportion.
In this way, GA can save processing time and deliver the result in report more quickly.
I don't want to suggest that the sampling would always affect accuracy to this extent.
But let's further consider when sampling could have the greatest impact.
When we're discussing sampling,
we need to consider the concept of cardinality.
Cardinality means the number of individual values for a single dimension,
which manifests as the number of rows in a report.
We want to be cautious of sampling in high cardinality reports.
That means when we're in a reports such as mobile devices and sampling has been applied,
because there are 242 rows in this report relatively high cardinality,
sampling is more likely to skew the data.
Now the sample size we're dealing with is 43.79 percent,
so almost half of the data.
So, the skewing probably still isn't too bad.
Where you want to be really careful is where you have
high cardinality and a very low sample rate,
then your data is likely to be very skewed.
Back in this report,
we see that there are only three rows,
this is a very low cardinality report.
With a low cardinality report and a relatively high sampling rate 44 percent.
In this case, we don't have to worry too much about sampling.
The breakdown of desktop mobile and tablet
for Australia and New Zealand is still probably fairly accurate,
again, because the sample rate is relatively high and the cardinality is very low.
If we want to unsampled sampled data,
a couple of options could be to export shorter time periods.
If the multiple time periods you select contain fewer than 500,000 sessions,
you could export reports from GA and reassemble them in another environment,
thereby reproducing unsampled data for a longer time period.
We will be talking more about exporting in the next lesson.
You can also use a specialized tool to retrieve
unsampled data that would otherwise be sampled in the GA UI.
Analytics Canvas is a third party tool that
in particular meets this need very effectively.
Most importantly, stay aware of sampling when you're using
custom reports and applying secondary dimensions or segments to your report.